Vera C. Rubin Observatory
Data Management
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert
Distribution
Eric C. Bellm, Robert D. Blum, Melissa L. Graham, Leanne P. Guy,
Željko Ivezić, William O’Mullane, Maria T. Patterson,
John D. Swinbank, and Beth Willman
LDM-612
https://doi.org/10.71929/rubin/2998139
Latest Revision: 2020-07-09
This Rubin Observatory document has been approved as a Content-Controlled Document by the
Rubin Observatory DM Change Control Board. If this document is changed or superseded, the
new document will retain the Handle designation shown above. The control is on the most re-
cent digital document with this Handle in the Rubin Observatory digital archive and not printed
versions. Additional information may be found in the corresponding DM RFC.

Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
Abstract
A major product of the nightly processing of LSST images is a world-public stream of
alerts from transient, variable, and moving sources. Science users will access these
alerts through community brokers or through a simple filtering service provided by
LSST. This document provides a guide to the plans and policies for the alert distri-
bution system to aid science users, broker developers, funding agencies, and LSST
Project personnel. It describes the components of the alert distribution system and
the data rights required to access specific scientific products. It provides guidelines
for organizations developing community brokers and describes the planned capa-
bilities of the LSST simple alert filtering service and Science Platform to aid science
users in planning for LSST science.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
ii
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
Change Record
Version Date Description Owner name
2018-12-26 Initial draft version Eric Bellm
1.0 2019-01-08 Approved in RFC-556. Approver:
W. O’Mullane
1.1 2019-05-13 Added referece to DMTN-102 RFC-592. Eric Bellm
1.2 2019-12-27 Revisions supporting broker call for proposals Eric Bellm
1.3 2020-02-11 Remove extraneous macros Eric Bellm
1.4 2020-07-09 Update due date; minor updates. Eric Bellm
1.4.1 2025-10-10 Add DOI. No change to content. Tim Jenness
Document curator: E. Bellm
Document source location: https://github.com/lsst/LDM-612
Version from source repository: 80e2617
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
iii
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Components and Capabilities of the LSST Alert Distribution System 3
2.1 Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.1.1 Data Acquisition, Transfer, and Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.1.2 The LSST Data Facility and Data Access Centers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2 Pipelines and Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2.1 Alert Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.2.2 Solar System Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2.3 Alert Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2.4 The LSST Alert Filtering Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.2.5 Forced Photometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.2.6 The LSST Science Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.3 Data Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.3.1 Alert Packets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.3.2 Processed Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.3.3 Prompt Products Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.3.4 Data Release Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.3.5 Alert Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3 Data Rights to Alert Stream Components 10
4 Guidelines for Community Brokers 11
4.1 The Role of Community Brokers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4.2 Requirements for Community Brokers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3 The Broker Selection Panel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.4 Letters of Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.5 Call for Proposals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.6 Required Technical Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
iv
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
4.7 Evaluation of Community Broker Proposals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.7.1 Scientific Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.7.2 Availability to the World Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.7.3 Scientific Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.7.4 Integration with the Time-Domain Ecosystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.7.5 Community Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.7.6 Complementarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.7.7 Existing Agreements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.8 Determining the Number of Community Brokers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.9 Broker Evolution Throughout Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.10 Resources for Proposers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.11 Resources for Selected Brokers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.12 Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5 Acronyms 19
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
v
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution
1 Introduction
LSST [11] will discover large numbers of astrophysical objects that move across the sky, change
in brightness, or appear as transients. Because of their intrinsic temporal variability, full sci-
entific exploitation of many classes of these events requires rapid discovery and additional
follow-up observations. Accordingly, LSST’s real-time Prompt Processing pipelines [ PSTN-019]
will identify such detections using image differencing and report them using world-public
alerts issued within 60 seconds of the shutter closure after each visit.
These alert packets will contain not only the information about the most recent detection but
also a historical lightcurve, cutout images, timeseries features, and other contextual informa-
tion. A science user will be able to use the contents of a single LSST alert packet to make a
decision that is both rapid and informed about whether the event is relevant to their scientific
goals. LSST expects to produce up to about ten million of these alerts nightly 1. The resulting
alert stream will be large—more than 1 TB nightly—but will contain all classes of astrophysical
events, from the youngest supernovae to the most distant RR Lyrae to the slowest-moving
Trans-Neptunian Objects to the most unexpected new phenomena. The task for the scientist
is to identify the small subset of events of interest in the larger alert stream.
To do so, astronomers will rely on third party community brokers , software systems that re-
ceive the full LSST alert stream and provide additional information to refine the selection of
events of interest. Community brokers may crossmatch the LSST stream to multiwavelength
catalogs, join LSST alerts with those from other surveys, provide machine-learned classifica-
tions of events, and/or offer user filters to winnow the stream. LSST will itself offer an alert
filtering service of more limited capacity that will apply user-supplied filters to the alert stream.
Individual scientists may receive alerts through one or more of these services.
The large volume of the alert stream and the finite bandwidth from the LSST Data Facility ne-
cessitate a proposal process to select community brokers that will receive the full stream. This
1The LSST alert stream will contain essentially all DIASources detected at 5 𝜎 in the difference image, including
a currently unknown fraction of artifacts. LSST will provide a threshold that may be used to filter transients in the
alert stream to 90% completeness and 95% purity at 6 𝜎 [LSE-30], so less than 5% of alerts filtered in this manner
will be artifacts. By varying the cutoff spuriousness value users may adopt other tradeoffs between completeness
and purity as well.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
1
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
document outlines the process, criteria, and timeline by which LSST will choose community
brokers. To provide context, we also summarize the major features of the LSST Alert Produc-
tion systems as well as relevant data rights concerns.
Throughout the document, we provide references to the formal LSST requirements and rele-
vant design documents as an aid to the interested reader.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
2
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
2 Components and Capabilities of the LSST Alert Distribution Sys-
tem
In this section we provide a high-level overview of the LSST Alert Production process to provide
background for science users of LSST alerts. Key numbers for Alert Production are summa-
rized in DMTN-102.
2.1 Facilities
2.1.1 Data Acquisition, Transfer, and Processing
LSST will survey the sky repeatedly using standard or alternate standard visits (currently base-
lined as 2 × 15second exposures in a single band or a single 30 second exposure, respectively).
Immediately after the camera reads out, the images will be transferred via fiber networks to
the LSST Data Facility (LDF; § 2.1.2). All subsequent data processing leading to alerts occurs
in the LDF. Alerts will be distributed from the LDF within 60 seconds of the camera readout
completing.
2.1.2 The LSST Data Facility and Data Access Centers
LDM-230 describes the concept of operations for the LSST Data Facility. The LDF hosts a va-
riety of computational services, including the Prompt Processing services that run the Alert
Production pipelines (§ 2.2.1) and the Batch Production services that run the annual Data Re-
lease Processing (§ 2.3.4). All Prompt Processing and Alert Production runs at the LDF; Data
Release Processing is split between the LDF and the CC-IN2P3 in France. The LDF also hosts
a Data Access Center (DAC) that provides access to proprietary data products (§ 3) through
the LSST Science Platform (§ 2.2.6). The LDF also hosts the alert stream feeds to community
brokers (§2.2.3) and the LSST Alert Filtering Service (§ 2.2.4).
An additional DAC will be located in Chile. Its capabilities are described in LDM-572. It will
host a copy of the raw data and processed data products and run a version of the Science
Platform.
2.2 Pipelines and Services
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
3
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
2.2.1 Alert Production
LSST Data Management (DM) Alert Production (AP) processes data during the night and gen-
erates alerts in close to real-time. It is described in LSE-163, with detailed descriptions of its
constituent pipelines and algorithmic components provided in LDM-151. The basic modules
include single-frame image processing (e.g., instrument signature removal, photometric and
astrometric calibration), difference image analysis (DIA; the subtraction of a coadded template
image constructed from the most recent Data Release from the new visit image), and source
detection, association, and measurement [ LSE-163]. AP will process all standard and alterna-
tive standard visits, whether obtained as part of the main wide-fast-deep survey or a Special
Program [ DMTN-065] and generate alerts within the required 60 seconds after the camera
readout completes (DMS-REQ-0004, LSE-61)2. Due to the need for Data Release Production-
derived templates, Alert Production cannot run at full scale and full fidelity during neither
commissioning nor the first year of operations. LSST DM is currently investigating options for
Alert Production in year one [ DMTN-107].
All sources in a difference image that have a signal-to-noise ratio SNR > 5 in positive or neg-
ative flux are considered “detected” DIASources, are incorporated into the DIASource catalog,
and will cause an alert to be issued 3. Additionally some SNR < 5 sources will be kept for diag-
nostic purposes, but will not lead to alerts. Source association and measurement occurs prior
to alert generation: every DIASource will have one unique match to a DIAObject (stationary ob-
ject) or known Solar System Object SSObject (moving object; see Section 2.2.2). The stationary
source association algorithms will be probabilistic and incorporate motion models for paral-
lax and proper motion [LDM-151]. If no association is possible a new DIAObject will be created.
Source measurements including centroid, fluxes, shapes, and other characterization param-
eters (Table 1 of LSE-163) are made, and the time-evolving parameters of the DIAObject such
as the parallax, mean flux, and periodic/non-periodic light curve features, will be updated to
include the new associated DIASource. At this point, the DIASource will be used to create an
alert packet (§ 2.3.1), regardless of whether the DIASource is associated with a new DIAObject,
2AP may also be able to process non-standard visits with longer or shorter exposure times provided that,
e.g., the visit image can be successfully PSF-matched and differenced with a template image. Alert generation
in crowded fields may produce more than the maximum of 10,000 alerts per visit required to be supported by
DM; alert generation in this circumstance is still under study.
3There may be exceptions to this rule, such as the following two examples. (1) Sources with SNR > 5 that have
a “high probability of being instrumental non-astrophysical artifacts” [LSE-163], potentially as determined by a to-be-
developed spuriousness or real/bogus classifier [ LDM-151], may not produce alerts. The limit on false positives
is set by the requirement that the alert stream be 90% complete at 95% purity for DIASources of SNR = 6 LSE-61.
(2) Sources with SNR < 5 that meet other to-be-determined criteria, such as the likelihood of being a potentially
hazardous asteroid, could produce alerts.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
4
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
a previously-existing DIAObject, or an SSObject.
2.2.2 Solar System Processing
After the completion of a night of observing, LSST Solar System Processing (SSP; LDM-156) will
attempt to identify new SSObjects using the updated Prompt Products Database (§ 2.3.3). SSP
algorithms form tracklets from pairs of single-apparition DIASources taken during one night,
generate tracks between nights, and fit orbits to identify and characterize moving objects.
Newly identified moving objects are added to the SSObject catalog. SSP will report candidate
moving objects to the Minor Planet Center (MPC), where they will be publicly available; will
ingest all previously known or externally identified moving objects into the SSObjects cata-
log; and will use MPC astrometry in the orbital parameter fits. Users interested in newly-
discovered asteroids will need to query the SSObject catalog or the MPC to identify them. The
first time a new SSObject is discovered, SSP will associate past DIAsources with the new SSOb-
ject as far back as is practical from the accuracy of the orbit. However, revised alerts will not
be issued. Future LSST detections of the new SSObject will produce alerts attributed to the
SSObject.
2.2.3 Alert Distribution
Alert packets (§ 2.3.1) will be queued for distribution to community brokers (§ 4) and the LSST
alert filtering service (§ 2.2.4). LSST is prototyping a bulk transport system built on the open-
source distributed queue system Apache Kafka 4, with Apache Avro 5 used as a binary serial-
ization format [ DMTN-093]. Initial tests indicate that this system performs effectively at the
required scale [DMTN-028].
Due to the finite bandwidth out of the LDF, only a limited number of selected community
brokers can receive the full alert stream. It will not be possible for individual science users to
subscribe directly to the full LSST alert stream. Rather, science users may access LSST alerts
through a community broker, or through the alert filtering service (§ 2.2.4) if they have data
access rights (§ 3). A minimum of five full streams is required to be supported [ LSE-61]. The
eventual number of selected community brokers (§4.8) is still to be determined, as it depends
on several quantities including available network capacity, packet size and contents, number
4http://kafka.apache.org/
5http://avro.apache.org/
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
5
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
of alerts per visit, and the rate of alert distribution. Current alert packets are estimated to be
about 82 KB [ DMTN-102]. Options to reduce the packet size are under consideration; these
include removing postage stamps, reducing or removing history, or including only a subset of
the DIASource or DIAObject record contents.
2.2.4 The LSST Alert Filtering Service
The LSST alert filtering service provides a means of real-time access to a subset of the alert
stream. Using the Science Platform (§ 2.2.6), users can upload simple filters (filters which only
use information within the alert packet) and receive on their own computer a real-time stream
of alerts which pass their filter. This capability is expected to be useful for science cases re-
quiring real-time notification that may be too specific to be well-served by community brokers.
The alert filtering service is required to support a minimum of 100 simultaneous users; limits
on resource usage and bandwidth (support for transmission of up to 20 full-sized alerts per
visit per filter is required) will be imposed to maintain performance 6. If necessary, a TAC-like
process may be used to allocate filtering service resources [ LSE-163]. The LSST alert filter-
ing service will support a version of the VOEvent standard7 that is current at the time of LSST
operations.
2.2.5 Forced Photometry
Measurements of DIAObjects that are below the SNR > 5 threshold are available through
“forced photometry”: flux is measured at a previously-known position. Forced photometry is
performed on difference images in two ways; neither contributes to alerts, but are available
to users through the Science Platform. First, during the real-time difference image analysis,
forced photometry is performed on every difference image at the locations of all previously-
known DIAObjects detected in a past interval to be determined. The resulting measurements
are stored in the Prompt Products Database (§ 2.3.3) and are queryable within 24 hours. Sec-
ond, at the end of the night, “precovery” forced photometry will be performed for all new
DIAObjects on every difference image from the past 30 days. These results are also stored in
the Prompt Products database and will be available within 24 hours.
6The requirement on the number of simultaneously connected users and number of passed alerts is largely
driven by outbound bandwidth limitations from the DAC at NCSA. We are investigating approaches that would
support larger numbers of active filters. Users with data rights that do not require real-time notification can also
programatically query the Prompt Products Database to identify DIAObjects or SSObjects of interest without using
the LSST alert filtering service.
7http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOEvent/
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
6
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
Additionally, a service shall be provided to users to obtain full-survey precovery for a limited
number of user-specified DIAObjects, also within 24 hours (DMS-REQ-0341, LSE-61). This ser-
vice will be made available through the Science Platform.
2.2.6 The LSST Science Platform
The LSST Science Platform (LSP) provides access to the proprietary data products (e.g., § 2.3.2–
2.3.5) held in the DACs. The Science Platform is described in full in LSE-319 and LDM-554.
It provides three means of accessing data: a web-based “Portal” for visual examination and
querying of the LSST images and catalogs; an interactive “Notebook” environment with asso-
ciated computing allocations for running code close to the data; and an Application Program-
ming Interface (API) for programmatic access to LSST data using Virtual Observatory stan-
dards.
2.3 Data Products
2.3.1 Alert Packets
The contents of an Alert packet are fully described in Section 3.5.1 of LSE-163. We reproduce
the list of included data here:
I. an ID uniquely identifying the Alert
II. the prompt products database ID
III. the database record of the DIASource that triggered the Alert, as well as the filterName
and programId of the corresponding Visit
IV. the entire associated DIAObject or SSObject record from the Prompt Products Database,
which include a variety of variability metrics computed on the updatedDIASource lightcurve.
V. Any DIASource and DIAForcedSource records that exist, and difference image noise esti-
mates where they do not, taken from the previous 12 months.
VI. postage stamps of the difference image and template at the DIASource location
The full list of parameters that are measured and included in the DIASource and DIAObject
records are provided in Tables 1 and 2 of LSE-163, respectively. The only trigger for an Alert is
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
7
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
the detection of a source in a difference image with SNR > 5. Thus, objects that are saturated
in the visit or template image, or objects that are the same brightness in both the visit and
template images will not generate an Alert. Imperfect subtractions may create artifacts with
SNR > 5 ; these will generally lead to an Alert, subject to overall capacity limits. A machine-
learned spuriousness score will be provided for each DIASource triggering an Alert, so users
may filter the stream for greater completeness or purity depending on their scientific needs.
The spuriousness classifier is required to achieve 90% completeness and 95% purity at 6 𝜎
[LSE-30] at a threshold spuriousness value.
2.3.2 Processed Images
Processed visit images (PVIs) and difference images produced by the prompt processing pipeline
will be available in the Science Platform to users with data rights within 24 hours. They are
held on disk for 30 days to enable the precovery forced photometry service (§ 2.2.5). PVIs for
older visits can be regenerated on-demand.
2.3.3 Prompt Products Database
The DIAObject, DIASource, and SSObject catalogs created by the Alert Generation pipelines are
held in a Prompt Products Database along with the outputs of the Forced Photometry. This
database is queryable through any of the aspects of the Science Platform.
2.3.4 Data Release Products
Annual8 releases of all the LSST data will include processed and stacked images, catalogs of
Sources, ForcedSources, and Objects from measurements on the stacked and individual im-
ages, as well as calibration information. It will also include a reprocessing of all images with
the latest pipelines and full-survey versions of DIASource and DIAObject catalogs—i.e., the vari-
ability characterization parameters are calculated from the entire survey to date. All of these
products are queryable through the Science Platform.
8There will be an additional initial data release containing data from the first six months of operations [ RDO-
011].
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
8
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
2.3.5 Alert Database
All alerts will be stored in their full original form in an archive hosted in the DACs. This archive
is expected to be of most use for testing broker filters or for studies that need to emulate real-
time identification of transients from the alert packets. Users who simply wish to work with
large samples of lightcurves will likely prefer to query the DIAObject and DIASource or Object
and ForceSource tables directly.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
9
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
3 Data Rights to Alert Stream Components
LSST data rights and data access policies are formally described in the LSST Data Rights Policy
document, RDO-013, which is in development at this writing. The interested reader is advised
to consult that document for details. We summarize here for convenience those aspects of
the policy that pertain to LSST alerts. In the case of any discrepancy between this document
and the LSST Data Rights Policy document, the LSST Data Rights Policy document shall take
precedence.
LSST alert packets (§ 2.3.1) are a world-public data product. We use “public” here in the sense
that alert packets can be freely shared with anyone, by anyone, anywhere, worldwide. How-
ever, LSST does not have the bandwidth to serve the full alert stream directly to individuals;
thus, the term “public” means “shareable” and should not be misinterpreted as “freely avail-
able.”
Instead, the LSST alert stream will be delivered to a to-be-determined set of community bro-
kers (Section 4). Brokers may share (or not share) the contents of alert packets with whomever
they choose, although the broker selection process (§4) will prioritize selection of brokers that
will provide world-public access to their services. The contents of the DIAObject, DIASource,
DIAForcedSource, and SSObject tables held in the PPDB are also public and may be freely
shared, although the ability to access and query the PPDBs held in LSST DACs is restricted
to data rights holders.
Access to proprietary LSST data (e.g., recent LSST images or the current LSST data release) is
restricted to data rights holders. Brokers run by LSST data rights holders may facilitate access
to these data for data rights holders but may not redistribute proprietary data. Proprietary
data may be used as part of alert classification; the alert classifications are a derived data
product and may be made public.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
10
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
4 Guidelines for Community Brokers
4.1 The Role of Community Brokers
Community brokers will play a vital role in enabling time-domain science with LSST. By re-
ceiving the LSST alert stream, adding value, and redistributing it to the scientific community,
brokers facilitate full exploitation of the scientific value of the real-time LSST alerts.
We envision that community brokers, individually or jointly, may provide a variety of functions.
These may include, but are not limited to:
• redistributing alert packets to a defined or world-wide community
• filtering alerts for specific science goals or to remove potentially spurious alerts 9
• cross-correlating LSST alerts with other static catalogs or alert streams
• classifying events scientifically
• providing user interfaces to the data
• coordinating scientific activity among collaborators
• triggering followup observing
• for users with appropriate data rights, facilitating followup queries and/or user-generated
processing within the LSST Data Access Center
• managing annotation & citation as followup observations are made
• collecting classification and other information gathered by the scientific community
Some of these functions may be performed by “Target and Observation Managers” [TOMs;
21] that may either be integrated into community brokers directly or connect to annotated
and/or filtered streams delivered by a broker. For simplicity, we will here refer to any system
that connects directly to the LSST alert stream as a broker.
9trading completeness for purity
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
11
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
4.2 Requirements for Community Brokers
Because of the large data volume of the alert stream (several TB per night), finite bandwidth
from the LSST datacenter prevents sending a full copy of the alert stream to all interested
parties. Additionally, we anticipate that community brokers will require some level of support
from the LSST operations team. Accordingly, LSST is conducting an open proposal process
in order to select brokers with sufficient technical capability to enable valuable and reliable
scientific returns.
We believe the scientific community will be best served by a rich broker ecosystem offering
diverse capabilities. Any institution worldwide was allowed to submit a Letter of Intent (§ 4.4).
The LSST SAC decided to invite all institutions who submitted a LOI to submit a full proposal.
Demonstration of appropriate technical and personnel resources to support the proposed
goals were the minimum requirement to be considered.
Recognizing that different science goals may benefit from different technical approaches, and
that proposing institutions may have a range of strengths and experience, the proposal solic-
itation does not place any explicit functional requirements on proposed brokers. Thus a pro-
posed broker is not required to consume the whole stream, to redistribute the full stream, to
operate for the full ten-year survey, or to make its products world-public, for example. How-
ever, given the small and finite number of brokers to be selected (§ 4.8) and the evaluation
criteria (§ 4.7), proposals offering to do so will be more likely to be selected. The selection
committee will evaluate the proposals holistically, weighing the unique capabilities proposed
in order to maximize the scientific output of LSST.
While we expect the evaluation process to favor proposals that receive the full alert stream,
brokers may propose to receive only a filtered subset of events (or a subset of the alert packet
contents) from LSST. We anticipate that this capability would be provided by the same tech-
nology underlying the LSST alert filtering service, potentially with less restrictive requirements
than are placed on user-provided filters. Some broker services, particularly those processing
only a small subset of alerts, may elect to receive alerts from other community brokers rather
than from the LDF directly. Brokers requesting direct access to the alert stream who agree to
forward alerts to downstream services will be favored in the selection process.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
12
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
4.3 The Broker Selection Panel
Broker proposals will be evaluated by a panel designated by the LSST Science Advisory Com-
mittee. Appropriate care will be taken to avoid conflicts of interest. The panel will include ex
officio representatives from the LSST Project Office, LSST Operations, and LSST Data Manage-
ment to provide policy and technical guidance.
4.4 Letters of Intent
The broker proposal process will have two stages: an initial open call for Letters of Intent
(LOIs) from all interested parties, and a subsequent full proposal call solicited from invited
LOI writers. This two-stage process ensures those writing full proposals have a reasonable
chance at selection and provides an opportunity for early feedback. An invitation to submit
a full proposal may also be valuable to proposers in obtaining relevant funding. No financial
support is available from the LSST Project. The LOI call was issued in LDM-682.
LOIs were evaluated using the same criteria as the full proposals (§ 4.6–4.7), with recognition
that the proposed brokers may have been in the conceptual or early design stage at the time
of the LOI.
4.5 Call for Proposals
The call for full proposals for LSST brokers was issued in LDM-723. The broker selection panel
will use these proposals to select the brokers that will receive alert streams directly from the
LSST Data Facility.
4.6 Required Technical Resources
The panel will evaluate whether the proposed broker system is technically feasible and appro-
priately supported for the proposed goals. At minimum, this requires:
• Large inbound and outbound network bandwidth (the full alert stream is a few TB/night)
• Petabytes of disk capacity
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
13
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
• Databases capable of handling billions of sources
• Compute resources to handle sophisticated classification and filtering tasks in real time
at scale
• Appropriate personnel and sufficient effort to develop the required software and to
maintain and operate the service
• Institutional support to ensure the longevity and stability of the service and software. By
default selected brokers will be expected to plan to operate for the full ten-year survey.
• Discussion of funding sources to support broker development and operations.
4.7 Evaluation of Community Broker Proposals
The broker selection panel will evaluate proposals with a primary goal of maximizing the sci-
entific exploitation of LSST—recognizing that many of LSST’s scientific returns are likely to be
unanticipated.
The panel will evaluate broker proposals that demonstrate appropriate technical resources
(§4.6) using the following evaluation criteria:
4.7.1 Scientific Value
The panel will consider whether a proposed broker has the potential to add scientific value
that serves a large community, enables high-profile science, or provides unique capabilities.
In particular, the panel will evaluate the proposed contributions to LSST’s four science pillars10.
The panel will prioritize proposals that require or take advantage of the unique aspects of the
LSST alert stream, namely its real-time and world-public nature.
4.7.2 Availability to the World Community
Because community brokers are the means by which scientists without LSST data rights may
access the public contents of the alert packets, the panel will prefer proposals that make their
10These are: Probing Dark Matter and Dark Energy, Taking an Inventory of the Solar System, Exploring the Tran-
sient Optical Sky, and Mapping the Milky Way [ LPM-17].
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
14
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
products and services world-public. At least one broker that provides world-public access to
alerts will be selected.
4.7.3 Scientific Validity
The panel will look for evidence that scientific products, such as photometric classifications,
produced by a proposed broker are accurate. Brokers may demonstrate performance in pro-
duction on precursor surveys or by data challenge. The proposal call will provide sample
alerts generated by LSST pipelines from precursor survey data that may be used for testing
and evaluation.
4.7.4 Integration with the Time-Domain Ecosystem
For science cases involving real-time followup, the panel will consider the extent to which pro-
posed brokers facilitate integration with followup resources, other surveys and alert streams,
other brokers and services, existing communities of observers, and archives.
4.7.5 Community Adoption
The panel will consider whether a proposed broker system has already demonstrated scien-
tific value and community adoption on precursor streams. This evaluation will also assess the
range of scientific, geographic, and institutional communities that have utilized the service as
well as the publications it enabled.
4.7.6 Complementarity
To maximize scientific returns, the panel will aim to select an ensemble of complementary
brokers. Brokers that are more limited in scope or scientific goals may be selected if they
provide capabilities not present in other selected brokers or are serving scientific communities
that would otherwise be unable to use LSST alerts.
4.7.7 Existing Agreements
The panel will consider the applicability of any existing agreements, if relevant.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
15
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
4.8 Determining the Number of Community Brokers
Early sizing estimates indicated that only four full streams could be provided from the LSST
Data Facility due to network bandwidth limitations. Current capacity projections indicate a
larger number may be possible (§ 2.2.3), but with some uncertainty. A minimum of five full
streams is required [ LSE-61]. The available capacity will depend on:
• actual network capacity and usage patterns
• details of the alert format
• the achieved purity of the alert stream
Final capacity determination will not be possible until commissioning data is available. The
broker selection panel may elect to make guaranteed and provisional selections based on
these estimates. A subset of brokers may be selected for integration during the commission-
ing and early operations phases, with additional brokers joining as the survey reaches steady
state.
4.9 Broker Evolution Throughout Operations
Broker performance and usage will be reviewed periodically during LSST Operations at an
interval to be determined. Broker selections may be changed or additional new brokers added
due to changes in LSST survey or pipeline performance, broker performance or usage, or
community science priorities.
4.10 Resources for Proposers
To aid in broker development and testing, LSST is providing pre-packaged alert streams for
precursor datasets generated by the LSST Alert Production pipelines and distributed with
the expected formats and protocols. These LSST-processed alerts provide the best match
to the content and formats currently envisioned for LSST alerts, although the precursor sur-
veys themselves do not closely match the LSST depth, filters, cadence, etc. Details on these
sample alerts may be found at https://www.lsst.org/scientists/alert-brokers.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
16
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
Proposers may also wish to take advantage of the public alert archive from the Zwicky Tran-
sient Facility 11. ZTF alerts are shallower than the sample precursor alerts produced by the
LSST pipelines and contain somewhat different information 12. However, ZTF alerts are avail-
able in much greater quantities and in many cases have been spectroscopically classified 13.
Proposers may also or instead utilize simulations or other precursor datasets in their propos-
als if desired. In any case, proposers should be explicit about what data they use for demon-
strations, and explain the extent to which, and the limitations to which, they illustrate the
scientific and technical capabilities of their system.
4.11 Resources for Selected Brokers
Selected brokers will be expected to sign a Memorandum of Understanding codifying agree-
ment to respect LSST Data Rights policies (where relevant) and outlining expected interfaces,
support, and Service-Level Agreements for both parties. Selected community brokers will re-
ceive basic support from the LSST Operations Team to ensure that the alert stream is delivered
with the expected form, content, reliability, and timing. Additionally, status information will
be available during operations to diagnose processing and data transport problems as they
arise.
4.12 Timeline
The calendar-year timeline presented below is the current best estimate based on the LSST
project schedule and is subject to revision.
2018 • Q4 Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution document issued
2019 • Q1 Issue call for Letters of Intent (LOI)
• Q2 Letters of intent due
• June Broker development workshop (invited LOI writers)
• Q4 Revise this document. Invite full proposals for community brokers from selected
LOIs
11https://ztf.uw.edu/alerts/public/
12ZTF alerts have 30 days of history rather than one year, and no forced photometry or timeseries features, but
do include crossmatches to Gaia and PanSTARRS.
13see e.g., the Transient Name Server ( https://wiserep-tns.weizmann.ac.il/)
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
17
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
2020 • Q3 Document bulk transport format and interface. Distribute alert stream test soft-
ware.
• December 15 Broker proposals due.
2021 • Q2 Provisional broker selections made.
Subsequent steps depend on major commissioning milestones and will shift according to the
evolving commissioning schedule14. Alerts are provided during commissioning to enable engi-
neering tests of broker interfaces. Potential data release scenarios are described in RDO-011.
14See https://www.lsst.org/about/project-status.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
18
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
5 Acronyms
Acronym Description
AP Alerts Production
API Application Programming Interface
C Specific programming language (also called ANSI-C)
DAC Data Access Center
DAPOL Data Access Policy (Tag for policy statement)
DIA Difference Image Analysis
DM Data Management
DMS Data Management Sub-system
DMTN DM Technical Note
DRP Data Release Production
ID Identifier (Identification)
KB KiloByte
LDF LSST Data Facility
LDM LSST Data Management (handle for controlled documents)
LOI Letter of Intent
LPM LSST Project Management (Document Handle)
LSE LSST Systems Engineering (Document Handle)
LSP LSST Science Platform
LSST Large Synoptic Survey Telescope
MOPS Moving Object Pipeline System
MPC Minor Planet Centre
NCSA National Center for Supercomputing Applications
PSF Point Spread Function
RR Rate Reduction
SNR Signal-to-Noise Ratio (also denoted SN and S/N)
TAC Time Allocation Committee
TB TeraByte
References
[1] [LDM-682], Bellm, E., Blum, R., Graham, M., et al., 2019, Call for Letters of Intent for Com-
munity Alert Brokers , Data Management Controlled Document LDM-682, NSF-DOE Vera C.
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
19
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
Rubin Observatory, URL https://ldm-682.lsst.io/
[2] [LDM-723], Bellm, E., Blum, R., Graham, M., et al., 2020, Call for Proposals for Community
Alert Brokers, Data Management Controlled Document LDM-723, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin
Observatory, URL https://ldm-723.lsst.io/
[3] [RDO-013], Blum, R., the Rubin Operations Team, 2020, Vera C. Rubin Observatory Data Pol-
icy, Data Management Operations Controlled Document RDO-013, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin
Observatory, URL https://ls.st/RDO-013
[4] [LSE-30], Claver, C.F., The LSST Systems Engineering Integrated Project Team, 2018, Ob-
servatory System Specifications (OSS) , Systems Engineering Controlled Document LSE-30,
NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, URL https://ls.st/LSE-30
[5] [LSE-61], Dubois-Felsmann, G., Jenness, T., 2019, Data Management System (DMS) Require-
ments, Systems Engineering Controlled Document LSE-61, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Obser-
vatory, URL https://lse-61.lsst.io/, doi:10.71929/rubin/2587200
[6] [LDM-554], Dubois-Felsmann, G., Ciardi, D., Mueller, F., Economou, F., 2019, Data Manage-
ment LSST Science Platform Requirements , Data Management Controlled Document LDM-
554, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, URL https://ldm-554.lsst.io/
[7] [DMTN-107], Graham, M.L., Bellm, E.C., Slater, C.T., Guy, L.P ., Rubin Observatory Data Man-
agement System Science Team, 2020, Options for Alert Production in LSST Operations Year
1, Data Management Technical Note DMTN-107, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, URL
https://dmtn-107.lsst.io/, doi:10.71929/rubin/2997867
[8] [DMTN-065], Graham, M.L., AlSayyad, Y., Bechtol, K., et al., 2024, Data Management for LSST
Special Programs , Data Management Technical Note DMTN-065, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin
Observatory, URL https://dmtn-065.lsst.io/, doi:10.71929/rubin/2997573
[9] [DMTN-102], Graham, M.L., Bellm, E.C., Guy, L.P ., et al., 2024, LSST Alerts: Key Numbers ,
Data Management Technical Note DMTN-102, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, URL
https://dmtn-102.lsst.io/, doi:10.71929/rubin/2997858
[10] [LPM-17], Ivezić, Ž., The LSST Science Collaboration, 2018, LSST Science Requirements Doc-
ument, Project Controlled Document LPM-17, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, URL
https://ls.st/LPM-17
[11] Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S.M., Tyson, J.A., et al., 2019, ApJ, 873, 111 ( arXiv:0805.2366),
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c, ADS Link
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
20
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
[12] [LSE-319], Jurić, M., Ciardi, D., Dubois-Felsmann, G., Guy, L., 2019, LSST Science Platform
Vision Document, Systems Engineering Controlled Document LSE-319, NSF-DOE Vera C. Ru-
bin Observatory, URL https://lse-319.lsst.io/, doi:10.71929/rubin/2587242
[13] [LSE-163], Jurić, M., Axelrod, T.S., Becker, A.C., et al., 2023, Data Products Definition Docu-
ment, Systems Engineering Controlled Document LSE-163, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Obser-
vatory, URL https://lse-163.lsst.io/, doi:10.71929/rubin/2587118
[14] [RDO-011], Marshall, P ., 2020, Release Scenarios for LSST Data , Data Management Oper-
ations Controlled Document RDO-011, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, URL https:
//ls.st/RDO-011
[15] [LDM-156], Myers, J., Jones, L., Axelrod, T., 2013, Moving Object Pipeline System Design ,
Data Management Controlled Document LDM-156, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory,
URL https://ls.st/LDM-156
[16] [LDM-572], O’Mullane, W., 2021, Chilean Data Access Center , Data Management Con-
trolled Document LDM-572, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, URL https://ldm-572.
lsst.io/
[17] [DMTN-028], Patterson, M.T., 2018, Benchmarking a distribution system for LSST alerts ,
Data Management Technical Note DMTN-028, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, URL
https://dmtn-028.lsst.io/
[18] [DMTN-093], Patterson, M.T., Bellm, E.C., Swinbank, J.D., Nelson, S., Smart, B.M.,
2024, Design of the LSST Alert Distribution System , Data Management Technical
Note DMTN-093, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, URL https://dmtn-093.lsst.io/,
doi:10.71929/rubin/2586493
[19] [LDM-230], Petravick, D., Butler, M., Gelman, M., 2018, Concept of Operations for the LSST
Data Facility Services , Data Management Controlled Document LDM-230, NSF-DOE Vera C.
Rubin Observatory, URL https://ldm-230.lsst.io/
[20] [PSTN-019], Rubin Observatory Science Pipelines Developers, 2025, The LSST Science
Pipelines Software: Optical Survey Pipeline Reduction and Analysis Environment , Project
Science Technical Note PSTN-019, NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, URL https://
pstn-019.lsst.io/, doi:10.71929/rubin/2570545
[21] Street, R.A., Bowman, M., Saunders, E.S., Boroson, T., 2018, In: Guzman, J.C., Ibsen, J.
(eds.) Software and Cyberinfrastructure for Astronomy V, vol. 10707 of Society of Photo-
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
21
Plans and Policies for LSST Alert Distribution | LDM-612 | Latest Revision 2020-07-09
Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, 1070711 ( arXiv:1806.09557),
doi:10.1117/12.2312293, ADS Link
[22] [LDM-151], Swinbank, J.D., Axelrod, T.S., Becker, A.C., et al., 2020, Data Management Sci-
ence Pipelines Design , Data Management Controlled Document LDM-151, NSF-DOE Vera C.
Rubin Observatory, URL https://ldm-151.lsst.io/, doi:10.71929/rubin/2587108
The contents of this document are subject to configuration control by the Rubin Observatory DM Change
Control Board.
22